the most viable path to come work in the
United States, apply for H-1B visa.
I didn't understand why someone from
another country could come and take my
job.
The statement that he made is don't get
your hands dirty.
Remember earlier this year when Elon
Musk and President Trump were still
friendly? That shaky alliance brought to
the four a persistent controversy in
Trump land. Everybody seen the
headlines, this dust up between the tech
bros, Elon Musk versus the traditional
MAGA people who are against immigration
and it was centered on H-1B.
Biggest companies who hate us the most
pushing for more foreign labor.
You saw Elon Musk's comments. Donald
Trump voiced his own support for H-1B
visas.
You need a pool of people to work for
your companies and they have to be smart
people.
Skilled immigrant workers bring money to
the US government.
If you look at some of the top tax CEOs,
Google, Microsoft, Avidia, Tesla, their
CEOs are immigrants. The alphabet soup
of H1B, L1, and all manner of other
foreign worker visas may seem like a
simple pro versus anti-immigration
issue. But looking more closely at these
programs reveals a system rife with
opportunities for fraud and exploitation
that's badly in need of reform and
perhaps even expansion.
Lottery system simply does not make
sense.
The way that they're using these visas
is just wrong.
Someone needs to be held accountable for
the corruption that has happened. If you
are a multinational outsourcing company,
these companies don't really care who
gets the visa as long as someone gets
the visa.
What you have is a massive labor
arbitrage scheme to help corporations
make profits. Labor markets are getting
destroyed in the process.
The H-1B program was designed to attract
the best and brightest to fill high
skill jobs in the United States where
domestic talent is in short supply.
The visa was created in 1990 when the
tech industry really started and there
was a short supply of tech talent and
programmers. Even though our economy has
dramatically changed since then, the H1B
visa program largely has not changed.
Something close to 80% of the petitions
are now held by Indian workers. Part of
it is because India has very much built
their economy around services, software,
engineering, the types of skills that
the US economy tends to not have.
[Music]
Nothing is visible, right?
My visa is in pending status and that's
why I prefer to remain anonymous. While
growing up, I knew only two fields. I
can either be engineer or a doctor. I
did not have any other choice. You need
to do a STEM field. It's ingrained in
Indian culture. When I came to the USA
for my masters, I was not planning to be
here for a long time. But once I got a
job as a software development engineer
for a tech firm, they filed for my H1B
visa. I knew that it's a matter of luck.
It's very low probability.
There's so much demand for it. The
government has to run a lottery. Last
year, over 450,000
people registered for the lottery for
the only 85,000 slots.
You get three attempts for H1B. Luckily,
my visa got picked up in my last
attempt. Obviously, it's an unreal
feeling that you got another chance to
stay back in this country and you want
to make the most out of it.
The visa is actually owned by the
employer. It's not owned by the H-1B
employee. They're referred to as the
beneficiary. The fact that the the
employer owns that visa gives the
employer extraordinary control.
Starting 2023, we've been hearing from
sources and people on social media
complaining about the surge of lottery
entrance.
Many firms are not getting the visas
that they apply for. The irony of the
program is if you are a company seeking
to employ a specific person with special
skills, the game is stacked against you.
From the very beginning, this H1B
program was heavily dominated by
outsourcing and staffing companies. Like
in any lottery, the way to increase your
chance is to get more lottery tickets. A
lot of staffing companies got together.
They basically put in the same person's
name multiple times. We investigated and
we put together about 3,000 IT staffing
companies that game the system this way.
They are staffing companies. They work
with US clients. They'll hire people in
India for cheaper salaries. It's the
business model very successful business
model in India.
The most extreme case was a person's
name was put in 80 times. In 2024, USCIS
cracked down on multiple registration
fraud by not selecting based on unique
registrations, but rather by unique
individuals. Meanwhile, large
multinational outsourcing companies have
been leveraging a legal loophole to
overwhelm the lottery system.
If you name the Fortune 500 companies in
the US, pretty much every one of them
use outsourcing services.
[Music]
Rather than bringing in top talent, the
outsourcing companies bring in lower
salary workers, which heightens the risk
of undercutting American labor.
Tomok is a town in northern Wisconsin.
Harley-Davidson has two paint plants
here and their extrusion molding
facility. We paint all the parts that
you see on the bikes. Small town
America.
Everybody knows everybody.
[Music]
When I first started, I was hired with
Infosys as a contractor in the IT
department.
Not a lot of IT jobs up here. I mean,
this is northern Wisconsin. Good jobs
are hard to find. The internship was
basic desktop support, monitors,
printers, all that good IT stuff. I
loved it.
Harley-Davidson contracted Infosys for
their IT services throughout Wisconsin.
If you look at Indian stocks, Infosys,
Tata, these outsourcing companies are
kind of equivalent to the Mac 7 here.
They are the biggest companies in India.
In 2013, Infosys won the H-1B visa
lottery on behalf of their employee and
assigned him to work on site with their
client Harley-Davidson in Tomahawk,
Wisconsin.
contractor from Infosys came to
Tomahawk. I trained in my position. So,
they had me helping him find a place to
stay and getting him acclimated a little
bit to what he was going to expect here.
Nice guy. Real nice guy. The plants are
about 3 mi apart. We were required to
have a vehicle to get us back and forth
and he did not have any source of
transportation. The supervisor took it
upon himself to buy him a bicycle
because he was walking between the
plants and he rode the bicycle, which is
great in good weather, but this is
Wisconsin. And he rode that bicycle in
the snow. So crazy. People were
questioning on who the guy was that was
heading down to the Harley plant on the
bicycle.
I thought he was coming to be part of
our team. They did not really tell me
that I was training my replacement. Got
the email one day. They were giving me a
twoe notice.
Yeah.
Another type of visa gaming that workers
have described is applying for L1 visas,
which are supposed to be for managers or
executives, even when the worker in
question will have no managerial role.
Unlike H1B, which carries salary
requirement, the L visas don't, and
there's no annual cap.
Here we are at Red Rocks Amputator. This
is a unique landscape and the
surroundings. A very beautiful place for
us to get a visitors from India. We
bring them here because this is a unique
place which you can't experience
anywhere in the world.
Anukini is India immigrant who came to
this country via his employer TCS.
TCS applied for an L1A visa for me and
it got approved in quick time. And when
TCS won the contract for Western Union
and when they offered me long-term at
Denver location, I definitely took up
that opportunity considering there were
a lot of growth opportunities. I was
made the authority for the Denver region
to approve the visas and also manage the
resourcing and the operations.
I found that there were associates who
were not performing the roles which
their visas were approved for because
you can't have 22 managers working for
an account which has around 150 to 200
associates. I went to my reporting
manager and cautioned him why is this
happening? The statement that he made is
don't get your hands dirty.
Mr. Trump became the president for the
first term in 2017. We were expecting a
lot of audits. We had a call on 19th
Jan. That was a life-changing event.
That led me to file the whistleblower
complaint. In that call, the senior
operations lead from North America
instructed us to falsify records to be
compliant with the upcoming audits.
TCS Tata Consultancy Services is part of
the Tata group which is the biggest
company in India. What really jumped out
in the data? Tata has obtained five
times as many R1AS compared to its
closest competitor like Cognizant, like
Infosys with a similar US headcount.
It's unclear to us why you're in the
same industry. You have a similar
workforce in the US, but you need five
times as many visas.
I rejected giving those approvals and I
made it clear to my new manager that I
would not be approving any visas which
are not right.
I was terminated from TCS.
Okay, put the pencil here and we will
see you next week.
Good job.
I started looking for jobs in the IT
industry. I got no response. Even though
I was a green card holder and had all
the qualifications and I was ready for
it. I had already made my plans for
other career options and this has worked
well so far for me.
Good job. If you're comfortable, do
that. If it's making you slow, then try
to do this way.
I think there is general consensus that
this program is in dire need of reform.
The question at the heart of these visas
is, can US policymakers change this
system in ways that will be more fair to
workers no matter where they're from? Or
will corporate interests seek to
maintain a status quo that lowers labor
costs and increases their margins?
Immigrants make up the bulk of Silicon
Valley's workforce. So any attempt to
cut back on the program is a threat to
the US tech industry.
Founders are more likely to go to places
that have a startup visa, which we don't
have a startup visa.
Some economists estimate that millions
more engineers and developers will be
needed in the USA in the coming years.
Close to 60% of our PhD graduates in AI
are immigrants. Some of that could be an
education issue.
Wherever you go, you need math. Whether
you are buying groceries in a store or
whether you are building rockets, math
is a core skill that you need to have.
That's why we have a lot of Indians
doing good in engineering because your
math skills are strong from an early
age. So that is the skill that we are
trying to give to our students through
mental math and like math instead of
hating math.
I would definitely like to start
something in tech. I have a few ideas. I
don't think I can do that in this
country with the current visa status. If
visa does not work out, then I'm
mentally prepared to go back.
I was rehired for Harley-Davidson 2
years ago. They moved me back into kind
of doing the same job I was doing when I
was first here.
We filed the lawsuit in 2017 and we are
still awaiting the next steps.
Ultimately, I feel the truth will
prevail and I'm very happy that I am
owning this learning center. We are
providing good education to the kids.
The reason that this system's in place
is because of the end clients and the
corporations are making money off it and
then the middle folks, the IT staffing
companies who've taken advantage of the
whole system.
Raise the cap. Just tie it to economic
growth. And so as the economy grows,
that cap increases just so that you
don't have to renegotiate this every
three and a half decades.
[Music]